hello this is chef john from food wishes
comm with the ultimate mashed potatoes
that's right this is dedicated to
everyone who's posting a no fat or
low-fat mashed potato recipe for the
holidays
please food gods forgive them for they
know not what they do because not only
our holiday table mashed potato is
supposed to have butter in it they're
supposed to have a ridiculous amount of
butter in it so that's exactly what I'm
gonna show you how to do but fair
warning what you're about to witness can
never be unseen but if you think you're
up for it let's get started and one huge
tip here make sure you get potatoes
they're the same size
all right all three of these potatoes
were just over a pound each which means
once I trim them I'm gonna have about
three pounds of potatoes to work with
which is gonna make about eight generous
portions and then once those are peeled
we're gonna quarter them and to do that
we'll cut it in half and by the way if
the potato tapers a little bit I always
cut the tapered end a little longer see
that I didn't go exactly in half all
right that'll compensate a little bit
for the difference in girth so we'll cut
them in half we'll cut those halves in
half and that's a pretty good method for
getting even sized pieces by the way in
our original mashed potato video we cut
them in half lengthwise but we've
updated and then once those potatoes are
cut we're gonna rinse them very
thoroughly in fact you may have noticed
a little dirt on my fingers when I'm
peeling and cutting those I only rinsed
my potatoes once because you have to
rinse the starch off when they're cut
anyway why bother rinsing them before
you peel them that's like double in your
work and yes it was a long way to go to
explain that little spot of dirt on my
finger okay so once those are rinse
thoroughly we're gonna drain them and
dump them into our pot of cold water
that we're gonna generously salt by the
way like very generously so our ultimate
match pairs are actually gonna start off
season and we'll go ahead and bring that
up to a boil on the highest heat
possible and then we'll adjust our heat
to maintain a nice steady simmer and
we'll cook these until perfectly tender
and since that's gonna take a little
while we can go ahead and prep our
butter and I hope you're sitting down
because that's how much we're gonna use
that is one pound of European butter
also known as the expensive butter but
it is gorgeous very low water content it
almost has a clay-like texture but
anyway we're gonna take a pound of
butter we're gonna cut it up in chunks
and it's very critical this butter comes
up to room temperature it would be
perfect if this butter got up to like
sixty sixty-five degrees and I'm not
sure if you've crunched the numbers yet
but yes we're doing a three-to-one ratio
3 pounds of potatoes to 1 pound of
butter and I realize that
sounds completely insane but I'm the
blogpost I'm gonna explain why that's
not only not insane but it is an
incredibly rational an absolutely
reasonable thing to do so please check
that out especially if you're a fan of
airtight arguments all right so our
butters prepped and we'll head back over
to the stove to check our potatoes and
we really want these to be tender
all right so carefully check with a
spoon and a knife that knife should go
in with almost no effort I mean there's
just nothing more evil than mashed
potatoes with chunks of uncooked potato
in it
yes worse than Satan way worse so we're
gonna make sure these are very tender at
that point we're gonna drain them very
thoroughly we don't want any water in
here and yes if they've been cooked
enough they're gonna collapse like that
that does not mean they're overcooked
that means they're perfectly cooked
all right so we're gonna dump in our
very well drained potatoes we're gonna
turn our heat on to medium low we
definitely want to keep some heat under
this and we're gonna start mashing with
a wire potato masher all right check it
out accept no substitutes the old wire
potato masher nothing works as good and
during this first phase all we're doing
is breaking them up all right there's no
butter there's no milk just go around
until you think they're mashed oh and by
the way one of the great things about
having this much butter in the recipe
you don't really have to worry about
over mixing okay so do not be concerned
you're overworking this it's gonna be
perfect all right so after that initial
mashing we'll go ahead and dump in some
pepper and some salt and we're gonna
adjust the seasoning later but I know
I'm gonna need some and we'll also throw
in about a quarter of the butter chunks
and we'll go ahead and mix that up with
the masher until the butter just about
disappears and by the way do not forget
throughout this entire process your heat
is on medium low we want to keep
everything nice and hot don't forget
that butters only room temperature and
once that first addition of butter is
mashed in we're gonna switch to a wire
whisk we're gonna dump it another
quarter of the butter we're gonna mix
that in with the whisk when it almost
disappears at the next quarter of butter
and simply repeat until all the butter
is gone so in a way this is almost like
we're doing a butter sauce where we're
mixing in the butter and it's kind of
emulsifying in and you'll notice when
you get down to that last addition of
butter things are getting really light
and creamy and awesome looking and then
when that last addition of butter is
whipped in we're gonna go ahead and
finish this with just a splash of hot
milk just like a quarter cup I
microwaved mine and that's just gonna
lighten up and loosen things up just to
touch and we'll give that one last
whipping and at this point you're really
really gonna want to grab a fork nately
to taste one of the most delicious
things in the history of the universe
but you have to taste and adjust the
season at this points listen to me now
and hear me later if this does not have
enough salt it will not taste good
alright so mine was almost perfect but
it did need a little more salt and the
obligatory shake of cayenne and once
that's mixed in we can go ahead and turn
off our heat and serve so go ahead and
transfer those into your tater Bowl do
not garnish with anything except
possibly a few chives and that's only if
you're taking pictures this needs
absolutely nothing especially if you're
serving it as part of a big holiday meal
and yes when you bring that to the table
people will be thinking hmm those mashed
potatoes aren't white they're almost
butter colored that's probably just the
light I'm sure it doesn't look that way
from insane amounts of butter oh but it
does and seriously one taste and it will
all make sense it is just beyond
description
and there's a reason all those Michelin
star chefs make their potatoes this way
because they're just so above and beyond
well we usually enjoys mashed potatoes
that they almost become another type of
food some kind of butter potato hybrid
but tato
actually let me work on that so if
you're into enjoying and sharing with
your guest a proper bowl of mashed
potatoes this holiday season I really
hope you give these a try head over to
food wishes calm for all the ingredient
amounts and more info as usual and as
always enjoy
you